1 
 
Dr. John Oswalt, Isaiah, Session 22, Isa. 44-46 
© 2024 John Oswalt and Ted Hildebrandt 
 
This is Dr. John Oswalt in his teaching on the book of Isaiah. This is session number 
22, Isaiah chapter 44 through 46.  
 
We thank you, O Lord, for this lovely day. We thank you for the life that you have 
placed in your world. Thank you that the norm is life, life returning from the death of 
winter. And we thank you and praise you. 
 
Thank you, Lord, that because of what you have done for us on the cross and in the 
empty tomb and in Pentecost, we too have life forevermore. Though we look at 
bodies that are failing, nonetheless, we can know that our spirits are alive in you 
forevermore, and we thank you for that promise. Thank you again for the 
opportunity to study your word. 
 
Thank you for these rich, rich chapters, and we pray again that you'll guide us, help 
us to focus on the important things, and help us to recognize those issues that each 
of us needs to recognize as we live with you and allow you to live in us. Thank you. In 
your name, we pray. Amen.  
 
All right. We are, as of this moment, then a week behind schedule. If you happen to 
have your schedule, there's June 10th is the absolute cutoff date for me. That's the 
last Monday that I'll have free in the summer, so we have to stop then. So, what I'm 
going to plan is we will do 47 and 48 next week. 
 
The study guide is out there. On the 22nd, we will do chapters 49 to 51, and on the 
29th, we'll do 52 and 53, and that will get us back on track again. I had planned to 
spend an entire evening on 53, but 52 is not that long, so we'll double up a bit. 
 
Yes? You're counting three weeks there, and there are only two. Next week is the 
22nd. The 22nd. 
 
So, it is. Let's see. Tonight is the 15th, isn't it? Okay, so we've got to think some more. 
 
Anyway, next week we will do 47 and 48 on the 22nd and go from there. In chapter 
44, verses 1 to 5, we have, again, another prophecy of the coming of the Spirit. And 
we have here the fourth reason why God's servants should not fear. 
 
The first one was, I am with you. The second, I'll help you. The third, I've redeemed 
you. 
 
2 
 
Now what's this fourth reason why we should not fear? Verses 2 and 3. Fear not, for I 
will pour water on the thirsty land. I'll pour my Spirit out upon you. How does that 
relate to us? Fear not, for I will pour my Spirit upon you. 
 
Why is that a reason not to fear? Well, He's with us, yes. He'll strengthen us. The 
presence of His Spirit will give us strength. 
 
Anything else? Wisdom. The Spirit is the one who gives wisdom. The Spirit is also the 
one who enables us to live Christ's life. 
 
So, we do not need to be afraid of the enemy who comes in and says, you're not 
good enough, you can't measure up. The Holy Spirit comes as the, remember, the 
word is not comfort as much as it is encouraged. The Holy Spirit comes to be the 
encourager, to enable us to stand in the face of temptation, in the face of accusation, 
in the face of all that the enemy might throw at us. 
 
The Spirit is here. Now in this particular case, He says, I'm going to pour my Spirit 
upon your offspring. What was the fear when they went into exile? That's right, the 
nation would disappear. 
 
Their children would become pagan Babylonians, and that would be the end of it. But 
God says, no, I'll pour my Spirit upon them. And what will be the result in verse 5? 
What will the effect of the Spirit be? Well, they could say, I am the Lord. 
 
All right, there will be that willingness to belong to the Lord, to identify with the Lord. 
This one will call in the name of Jacob, another will write on his hand the Lord's, and 
name himself by the name of Israel. So that issue of identity, the Holy Spirit enabling 
us to identify ourselves with the Lord. 
 
The question that comes through the Bible again and again is, who is the king of your 
life? Who do you belong to? Who do you identify yourself with? How do you 
understand yourself? And the Holy Spirit comes to enable us to identify ourselves 
with the Lord. Yes, I am the Lord's. No ifs, no ands, no buts. 
 
I am His. So that continual issue that comes in the Christian life, is the issue of the 
will. Do I belong to me or do I belong to Yahweh? And the Spirit enables us to win 
that battle in a decisive way. 
 
In verses 6 through 8 we have a recap of the case against the idols. Here's another 
one of the I am's. I am the first. 
 
I am the last. Beside me there is no God. Notice in verse 6, the names. 
 
3 
 
Thus says, and remember when you see the Lord in small caps like that it's Yahweh. 
Thus says Yahweh. Now what are the other three titles that are used to identify Him? 
The King of Israel. 
 
Israel's Redeemer. And the Lord Almighty, the Lord of Hosts, the Lord of Heaven's 
Armies. Now what's the significance of piling up those three additional titles with 
Yahweh? What do they add to our understanding of who God is? He's Yahweh and 
He's the King. 
 
Once again, the story is told of Churchill and Roosevelt having a discussion. And 
Roosevelt said, now you do understand, Winston, that democracy is the finest of all 
human governments. And Winston Churchill immediately shot back and said, yes, 
and the government of heaven is a monarchy. 
 
So, it's not a democracy here, He's Israel's King. Now what does that mean? He's the 
sole ruler. And how about from the other side? From Israel's side? Worship Him? And 
God has an obligation to them. 
 
Israel is His Kingdom. Can He leave His Kingdom in the control of someone else? No, 
He can't, and so He's the Redeemer. And what does Lord of Hosts, or Lord Almighty, 
whichever you have, or the Lord of Heaven's Armies, what does that add to our 
understanding? Omnipotence. 
 
He is able to do it. So, He's got a relational obligation, He's Israel's King. And 
therefore, He's committed to redeem, and He's able to redeem. 
 
Takes us back to the questions we first talked about when we were looking at 
chapter 40. Does He want to deliver? Yes. Is He able to deliver? Yes. 
 
Is He going to deliver? Yes. All right, now remember what are the claims that God 
makes with regard to the gods. We have them here just in very brief form. 
 
There is no god except Him. What can't the gods do? Okay, look at the last part of 
verse 7. What can't the gods do? They cannot tell the future. They are part of the 
continuing natural system, and the natural system only knows what it always does. 
 
For something new to occur that has never occurred before, the gods cannot 
possibly tell that. But the one who stands outside the system, who made the system, 
He can do a brand new thing, and He can tell it in advance. The gods cannot do that. 
 
It is always interesting to me, that in the world of Old Testament scholarship, almost 
the first thing that is denied is that there could be such a thing as predictive 
prophecy. If there is a prediction in the Bible, well that actually, the event actually 
4 
 
happened first, and then somebody wrote in the prediction. But this prophet makes 
God's godhood hang on the fact that He can predict the future. 
 
And yet Old Testament scholars, so locked into naturalism, say, well, nobody can 
predict the future. That's right, no human can. But we're not talking about a human 
here. 
 
We're talking about God. So, fear not, don't be afraid. Here comes the fifth reason. 
 
Why shouldn't we be afraid? Verse 8, yes, you're mine. Yes, and He has told what has 
happened before, what's going to happen before it happens. So you don't have to be 
afraid. 
 
This is one of the important purposes of prophecy. Predictive prophecy is not given 
so that we can work out a timetable of the future. If anything has been 
demonstrated to us in the last 2000 years, it ought to be that. 
 
Virtually every time somebody tries to use predictive prophecy to work out a 
timetable, they're wrong. As I told you before, I've always enjoyed Francis Asbury's 
journal, in which at one point he says, Father Wesley believes that Christ will come 
back in 1812. I believe it's closer to 1839 myself. 
 
But why then does God predict the future? So we can be confident. God knows the 
future, God has the future in His hands, and we can live today without fear. How's He 
going to do it? That's His business. 
 
When's He going to do it? That's His business. But He has all things within His control. 
Alright, in verses 9 through 20 then, we have a long diatribe against idols and idol-
making. 
 
It's dripping with sarcasm. And you notice it's in prose, it's not in poetry, like what 
goes before and what follows. So, it was not necessarily said in sequence here, but it 
fits in the setting. 
 
So, if you were going to sum up what verses 9 through 20 say, how would you sum it 
up in a sentence or two? It's useless to make things out of everyday use, like fire that 
would burn the wood and that kind of thing. It's useless to make a god out of 
ordinary earthly material. Yes, yes, that's exactly what he's saying. 
 
And this thing that we've seen over and over again, you can either worship your 
maker, or you can make a god in your image to worship. Take your choice. Now he 
says, as we get down toward the end, verse 19, No one considers, nor is there 
knowledge or discernment to say, half of it I burned in the fire, I also baked bread on 
its coals, I roasted meat and have eaten, and shall I make the rest of it an 
5 
 
abomination? Now if you look up at the background there, abomination is a Hebrew 
word that describes something that is disgusting. 
 
Those things that are disgusting to Yahweh are things that are contrary to his 
creation order. And I give you a couple of references there, we don't have time to 
look at those, but if you're interested you can check those out. Now why would idol-
making be something that is particularly disgusting to God? All right, all right. 
 
All right. If you put your trust in what you've made, how can you possibly be on 
yourself, that's what God is. All right, if you put your trust in what you've made, how 
can that be something if I've made it myself? Yes, yes. Yes, yes. 
 
What are we doing when we worship an idol? Trying to control ourselves. We're 
worshiping the world, huh? The world that God created. Yes, yes. 
 
That's why it's an abomination. The creation was not given to be used. Excuse me, 
not given to be worshipped. 
 
It was given to be used. It was given to be cultivated. It was given to be developed. 
 
But it was not given to be worshipped. And so when we do worship that, that's an 
abomination to God. That's disgusting to God because it does not fit into his creation 
purposes. 
 
It separates us from God, yes. Yes. Yes, exactly. 
 
Exactly, exactly. I am the God and the idol is my creation. Yes, we've turned the thing 
right on its head. 
 
I think it is Augustine who said, idolatry is the use of that which should be 
worshipped and the worship of that which should be used. Idolatry is the use of that 
which should be worshipped and the worship of that which should be used. So then 
in verses 21 and 22, if 9 through 20 is an insertion, I'm not positive that it is, but I 
think possibly it is. 
 
If it is an insertion, then jump back to verses 6, 7, and 8. What are these things that 
we are to remember in verse 21? Remember who God is. Number one, I'm the first, 
I'm the last. Beside me, there is no God. 
 
All right? Don't be afraid. And remember how Yahweh identified himself? I'm your 
King, I'm your Redeemer, I'm the Lord of hosts. So, in the light of that, what does he 
say then that he has done in 21 and 22? Well, Israel is not forgotten because God has 
made provisions for her redemption and he is not bound and he will redeem. 
 
6 
 
Yes, yes. It's interesting, verse 21, I want you to remember, verse 21D, remember 
that you won't be forgotten. I will remember, I will not forget you. 
 
So, I formed you, there's number one. Verse 22 tells us the second thing he's going to 
do. I formed you and I have swept away your sins. 
 
I've blotted out your transgression. So, here it is again, this point that is made over 
and over again, he is the creator and therefore he can be the Redeemer. An idol 
cannot redeem you because redeem suggests a change in the order of things. 
 
But the one who made you, as a brand-new creature, is able to break into your life 
and redeem you. Today, when we have gone back to the worldview of paganism, the 
idea that you and I could be transformed is laughable. Well, of course not. 
 
You are what you are. You cannot transcend your inheritance. You cannot transcend 
your genes. 
 
You cannot transcend your environment. Transformation? Silly. No. 
 
What is salvation in the modern world? Self-actualization. You simply discover who 
you are and be it. Become something other than your conditioning. 
 
Become something other than all the things that have gone into making you up. Oh, 
no. No, no. 
 
And yet, the marvelous stories that you hear. One of the people who worked with 
Peter and Masha in Russia, went to Afghanistan when the Russians went to 
Afghanistan. We don't seem to learn much about Afghanistan. 
 
The British tried to do something with it and gave it up. The Russians tried to do 
something with it and gave it up. And now it looks like we're in the same position. 
 
But became an alcoholic, came back from Afghanistan, became a drug dealer and a 
thug, and was sent to a Russian prison, which is not a nice place. And somehow there 
came upon a Bible. And he has been transformed. 
 
And those stories can be multiplied a thousand, thousand times. The Creator is able 
to redeem. The Creator is able to transform. 
 
And I don't know. No, and I can't do anything for you, except maybe help you 
actualize yourself. So, for us to talk about a homosexual being transformed is not 
merely laughable to our world. 
 
It's worse than that. It's a denial of reality. And that's sad. 
7 
 
 
Okay. So once again, what's happening here? Grace is being offered as a motive to 
accept this offer of servanthood. I formed you. 
 
You are my servant. Oh, Israel, you'll not be forgotten by me. I have blotted out your 
transgressions like a cloud, your sins like mist. 
 
Return to me, for I've redeemed you. There's the bottom line of this whole case 
against the idols. They can't save you. 
 
I can. Verse 23, then. Why burst out into song at this point? The creation is 
worshiping the Creator. 
 
Sing, oh, heavens. Shout, oh, depths of the earth. Break forth into singing, oh, 
mountains. 
 
Oh, forest, every tree in it. For the Lord has redeemed Jacob and will be glorified in 
Israel. Look back at Romans chapter 8. The clock here says 20 minutes to 4, so we're 
in good shape. 
 
Good shape. As long as it's not 4 a.m. I don't know about that. Verse 22. 
 
Excuse me, verse 20. For the creation was subjected to futility, not willingly, but 
because of him who subjected it in the hope that the creation itself will be set free 
from its bondage to decay and obtain the freedom of the glory of the children of 
God. For we know that the whole creation has been groaning in the pains of 
childbirth until now. 
 
Yes, creation has a stake in our redemption. If the human race can be redeemed, 
then creation can be redeemed. So, the announcement of the Creator's redemption 
is a cause for singing. 
 
If you look back at chapter 42, verse 10. Remember, I spoke to you two weeks ago 
about the fact that there are two servants depicted here. The fearful servant, that is 
Israel, whom God is going to deliver, and they should simply rejoice in it. 
 
And then the obedient servant there, who is introduced in 42. So, look at verse 10. 
Sing to the Lord a new song. 
 
His praise from the ends of the earth, you who go down to the sea and all that fills it, 
the coastlands and their inhabitants. What's the cause for singing? God's 
redemption. And that redemption we are hinted to here is through his servant, his 
ideal servant, who will make our servanthood possible. 
 
8 
 
Okay, back to chapter 45. Excuse me, 44. In verses 25 and 26, what is the evidence of 
God's godhood? His predictions come true. 
 
Whereas the liars, the diviners, and the wise men, they just end up looking foolish. 
So, what has God said in verse 26? What does he promise? Jerusalem is going to be 
rebuilt. It's going to be inhabited again. 
 
Now remember what I've said before. When the prophets prophesied exile, the 
people said, no, it can't happen. If we were to go into exile, we would disappear as a 
people. 
 
And of course, all of God's promises will fail. So no, it can't happen. When the 
prophets prophesied return from exile, they said, no, nobody has ever returned from 
exile. 
 
The whole purpose of exile is to absorb all these separate cultures into one sort of 
homogenized mass. So no, we're not going to go into captivity. And number two, if 
we did go into captivity, we would never be heard of again. 
 
So no and no. God says yes and yes. You will go into captivity and I will bring you out 
of captivity. 
 
Very specific predictions. Yes, I think so. There are a number of possibilities there 
that could certainly point in that direction. 
 
But now God ups the ante. Verse 28. He names the deliverer. 
 
So you're going to go into captivity and you're going to come out of captivity and a 
man named Cyrus is going to bring you out. Now again, we're too familiar with this. 
We know it happened. 
 
But you know, Cyrus who? We don't know any Cyrus. Nebuchadnezzar? 
Nebuchadnezzar? Sennacherib? Cyrus? Cyrus. So, in chapter 45, verses 1 through 8. 
Tell us what God is going to do for Cyrus and what he's going to do through him. 
 
Notice 45.1. Cyrus is called God's Messiah. My anointed. My Messiah. 
 
So what privileges is Yahweh going to make available to Cyrus? What's he going to do 
for him? Going to break down gates? What else? Subdue nations? Strip kings of their 
ornaments? Verse 3. Going to give him the treasures that are hidden in the dark 
treasure houses. And why is he going to do it according to verse 3? Here we are 
again. So that you may know. 
 
9 
 
Some of you were with me in Exodus. Pharaoh, tomorrow, about this time, the sky is 
going to be filled with locusts. So that you may know. 
 
Here it is again. But in this case, I'm going to give you the treasures of the world so 
that you may know. And, why do I want you to know my name? Verse 4. For the sake 
of my servant, Jacob. 
 
And then I like the last part of verse 4. You don't know my name, Cyrus, but I know 
yours. Then in verse 5. Another one of these wonderful I am statements. I am 
Yahweh. 
 
There is no other. Beside me, there is no God. I equip you though you do not know 
me. 
 
I'm at work in the world. And I'm at work with people who know nothing about me. 
Not only do I work with those who know me. 
 
I work with those who don't know me. I'm the creator. I'm Yahweh. 
 
And once again. Why is he doing this? Verse 6. That people may know. I'm calling you 
and using you so that you may know. 
 
And so that the people may know. From the rising of the sun to the west. And here 
we go again. 
 
That there is none beside me. I am Yahweh. And there is no other. 
 
Do you think he's trying to make a point, maybe? Yes. Yes. Now verse 7. Is often 
troubling to people. 
 
Especially as it was written in the King James. I form light. And create darkness. 
 
I make peace. And create evil. That's what the King James says. 
 
I have the English Standard Version here. I make well-being. And create calamity. 
 
And that's probably a little more. Precise. But what's the point that is being made 
here? I'm the Lord. 
 
Exactly. Exactly. Now you see. 
 
This is where. We've got to. Navigate carefully. 
 
The pagan worldview. Sees good and evil. As independent entities. 
10 
 
 
That are simply part of reality. So why do bad things happen? Well because the evil 
force. Overcame the good force. 
 
And so bad things happen. The good force just wasn't strong enough. To prevent 
this. 
 
And when good things happen. That's when the good force. Overcomes the evil 
force. 
 
And good things happen. This is called dualism. Two basic entities. That has always 
existed. Call them. Yin and yang. 
 
Positive negative. Isaiah is saying. No. No. There is only one. Eternal entity. 
 
And therefore. Everything that is. Goes back to him. 
 
And it's interesting that. From a biblical perspective. Evil is kind of a negative. 
 
It's a kind of nothing. It's the absence of good. It's not a positive something. 
 
That exists on its own. Now I've said this before. But you forget everything I say. 
 
So, I'll say it again. We can distinguish between primary cause and secondary cause. 
And tertiary cause. And that helps us. 
 
Did God. Make that bad thing happen to me. No. 
 
But did God permit it? Did he make a world in which bad things can happen to good 
people? Yes, he did. 
 
So, the Old Testament. Is not particularly interested. In secondary and tertiary. 
 
What they're trying to drive home is. If it happened. God is alone. 
 
Responsible for it. Not some Babylonian God. Not some demon. 
 
Not something else. If it happened. God is ultimately responsible. 
 
That's the point they're trying to hammer home. And that's a very strange point. In 
the pagan world. 
 
And in the modern world. Okay. Pushing on then. 
 
Once again. Here's this song. Shower oh heavens from above. 
11 
 
 
Let the clouds rain down righteousness. Let the earth open. That salvation and 
righteousness may bear fruit. 
 
Let the earth cause them both to sprout. I the Lord. Have created it. 
 
If it happens. I did it. Now, what's going on? In verses nine through 13. Seems like we 
change gears rather drastically. 
 
What's going on? What is God saying? To the people. 
 
What's he accusing them of doing? Woe to him who strives with him and who 
formed him. A pot among earthen pots. 
 
Does the clay say to him who forms it? What are you making or your work have no 
handles? Woe to him who says to a father. 
 
What are you begetting? Or to a woman. With what are you in labor? 
 
Thus says the Lord the Holy One of Israel. The one who formed him. Ask of me the 
things to come. 
 
Will you command me concerning my children and the work of my hands? I made 
the earth and created man on it. It was my hands that stretched out the heavens. 
 
I commanded all their host. Now here. Verse 13. 
 
What's he talking about? Yes. Who is the one that I stirred up in righteousness? 
 
Cyrus. Yes. Yes. 
 
Pretty clearly. People are saying. Wait a minute. 
 
You can't do that. Cyrus is a pagan. He didn't know who you are. 
 
You can't use a pagan to do Christian things. No, no, no. 
 
We know how you deliver. We got to get a Hebrew baby. And we got to put him in a 
basket in the Euphrates River. And the Babylonian princess will find him. And the 
Babylonian court will train him in administration and military. 
 
Power. And then he will come. And he'll try to deliver us. 
 
And it won't work. And he'll have to go off into the Arabian desert for 80 years. And 
then after that he'll sort of get his act together. 
12 
 
 
And he'll come back. And he'll do all the. That's the way you deliver God. 
 
In case you've forgotten. And God says. You are the pot on the wheel. 
 
Are you going to tell me how to make you? I confess I've done that numerous times. 
God, you're not doing this right. 
 
That's not where you put the handle God. So, he is talking to those who are accusing 
him of not being able to do what he's doing or not knowing what he's doing. So what 
does he say then in verses 14 through 19. 
 
Thus says the Lord. The wealth of Egypt and the merchandise of Kush and the 
Sabians men of stature will come over to you and be yours. They will follow you. 
 
And they'll come over in chains and bow down to you. Now to that point we might 
think he's talking to Cyrus. But look how he goes on. 
 
They will plead with you saying surely God is in you and there is no other. No God 
beside him. So, it looks like no he's talking to redeemed Israel. 
 
Out there in the future. Now here's what the nations go on to say in verse 15. Truly 
you are a God who hides yourself. 
 
Oh God of Israel the Savior. All of them are put to shame and confounded the makers 
of idols go in confusion together. But Israel is saved by the Lord with everlasting 
salvation. 
 
You shall not be put to shame or confounded to all eternity. Now what is God's 
response to that in verses 18 and 19? Yeah, I'm God. 
 
I created the heavens. That's right. That's right. 
 
The nations may say boy oh boy you're God Israel. He's really obscure. It's really 
tough to figure out what he's doing. 
 
And God says no it isn't. No, it isn't. I didn't speak in secret. 
 
I didn't say to the offspring of Jacob seek me in vain. I the Lord speak the truth. I 
declare what is right. 
 
The significance of this book. If you don't have this book then yeah you can say God's 
ways are a mystery. Who knows what he's doing. 
 
13 
 
I don't understand what's going on. God says hey I did not speak in secret. I didn't 
create this world to be chaos. 
 
That's what the pagans think. I created this world with purpose and with design and I 
have declared what my purpose and my design are. There it is. 
 
It's very easy for us to give lip service to the book. Now you know I'm preaching to 
the choir here. You're people who don't give lip service to the book but it's still very 
very easy for us to do it. 
 
To put it in an honored place but not really to spend the time to figure out what God 
is saying. Most of you here will be old enough to know what I'm talking about when I 
speak of the Sears catalog. Remember that? The preacher came to visit. 
 
The lady of the house said to her little boy oh honey go get the big book that Mama 
loves so well. The kid came back with the Sears catalog. Our children know. 
 
Our children know. I haven't spoken in secret. If you want to know who I am and how 
I work what my plans are, it's here. 
 
The question is are you willing to dig a little bit to find it? All right. Now then 
beginning in verse 20 and running really all the way through 46.7 there's a wonderful 
wonderful picture here. Once again God is calling the nations. 
 
Assemble yourselves and come. Draw near together you survivors of the nations. 
They have no knowledge who carries their wooden idols and keep on praying to a 
God that cannot save them. 
 
Now look down at verse 46.1. Baal and Nebo are two of the gods of Babylon. Bel and 
Nebo. Bel bows down. 
 
Nebo stoops. Their idols are beasts and livestock. Get this sentence. 
 
These things you carry are born as burdens on weary beasts. They stoop, and they 
bow down together. They cannot save the burden but themselves go into captivity. 
 
Listen to me O house of Jacob. All the remnant of the house of Israel who have been 
carried by me from before your birth. Carried from the womb even to your old age I 
am he and to gray hairs, I will carry you. 
 
I have made. I will bear it. I will carry and will save. 
 
Now what's the contrast here? What are the pagans doing? They're carrying their 
gods. And what is the Lord doing? Carrying us. Carrying us. 
14 
 
 
You can be carried by your maker or you'll have to carry what you made. A lot of us 
don't have little statues in our houses but a whole lot of us are burdened down with 
the stuff we've made in our lives. I've quoted this before but it struck me the first 
time I read it and it continues to ring for me. 
 
Dietrich Bonhoeffer said you can only really own something that you can honestly 
see yourself as better off without. You can only really own something that you can 
honestly see yourself as better off without. If I have to have it, if I have to have it, it 
owns me. 
 
So I'm always entranced by that picture. Assemble yourselves and come. Draw near 
together you survivors of the nation. 
 
They have no knowledge who carries their wooden idols and keep on praying to a 
God who cannot save. In verses 21 and 22 here's another statement of the case 
against the gods. Declare and present your case together. 
 
Let them take counsel together. So what is God claiming there in verse 21? I told you 
this long ago. I declared it of old. 
 
What does that prove? There is no other God beside me. A righteous God and a 
savior. There is none beside me. 
 
Verse 23. By myself, I have sworn. That's what God did in Genesis 15 when he said to 
Abraham you will have more children than the stars of the heaven or the sand of the 
seashore. 
 
Cut some animals in half and the incense pot and the torch passed through between. 
And the writer to the Hebrews has it exactly right. God swore by himself there being 
none higher. 
 
When Moses took half the blood and splashed it on the altar God was swearing by 
himself. May God strike God dead if God ever breaks this covenant. By myself I have 
sworn from my mouth has gone out in righteousness a word that will not return. 
 
Over and over in this part of the book God speaks about his word that is unchanging 
and will accomplish its purpose. To me every knee shall bow every tongue shall 
swear allegiance. Paul is clearly picking up on this verse as he speaks of Jesus who 
has humbled himself even unto death. 
 
Every knee will bow and every tongue declare that Jesus Christ is and what did that 
mean to a Jew? Yahweh. See we miss that. Oh, Jesus Christ is boss. 
 
15 
 
Jesus Christ is in charge. Jesus Christ is Lord. Jesus Christ is Yahweh. 
 
That's the shocking thing that that early Christian creed means. Jesus Christ is Lord. 
He is Yahweh. 
 
Okay. We actually are coming close to finishing on time. Not quite but anyway. 
 
Chapter 46 really then sums up everything that has been said in these previous four 
chapters. Number one this picture of God who carries us. He made us and he'll carry 
us. 
 
Then verses 5, 6, and 7 wrap up that idea. To whom will you liken me and make me 
equal and compare me that we may be alike? Do you remember where we saw that 
last? Chapter 40. Those who lavish gold from the purse weigh out silver in the scales, 
hire a goldsmith, he makes it into a god and they fall down and worship. 
 
They lift it to their shoulders. They carry it. They set it in its place and it stands there. 
 
It cannot move from its place if one cries to it, it does not answer or save him from 
his trouble. There's your choice. You can make your own god but in the end, it can't 
help you. 
 
Remember this. Stand firm. Recall it to mind you transgressors. 
 
Remember the former things of old. Remember I predicted all this because I'm not a 
god. I'm the creator who stands outside the circle of time. 
 
And here's the last of these I am's. I am God and there is no other. I am God, there's 
none like me. 
 
Declaring the end from the beginning. Back there in the beginning I declared the end. 
You see in a circular world, in a circular view of time, there is no beginning and there 
is no end. 
 
The ancients imagined time as a snake eating its own tail. There is no beginning and 
there is no end. God says yes there is. 
 
In the beginning, I declared how things are going to end. Saying my counsel will stand 
and I will accomplish all my purpose. The gods have no purpose except survival with 
a maximum of security and comfort and pleasure. 
 
God has a purpose. That we should share his character. That we should have 
fellowship with him forever and ever. 
 
16 
 
Calling a bird of prey from the east, the man of my counsel from the far country. I 
have spoken, I will bring it to pass. I have purposed, I will do it. 
 
Now God has no illusions about these people. Listen to me you stubborn of heart. 
You who are far from righteousness. 
 
I bring near my righteousness. It is not far off. And my salvation will not delay. 
 
I will put salvation in Zion for Israel my glory. Now what's the point of that? Let's talk 
about this and then we'll close. What can we do that will cause God to redeem us? 
Good, good, good. 
 
I was hoping for that. Because that's exactly right. Not their repentance. 
 
Not their faith. Grace is totally God-initiated. They have not done one thing to 
deserve this redemption that God is promising. 
 
And neither can you or I. That's the whole point of Romans chapters 1 through 5. 
There is nothing you and I can do. It is wholly from God's point of view and that 
ought to motivate us then. That ought to motivate us to repentance. 
 
It ought to motivate us to have faith. And it ought to motivate us to godliness. I want 
to be like the one who without any justification whatsoever reached down into the 
pig pen and said, come home. 
 
Those of us who attend the Nicholasville church heard the prodigal son story again. 
Actually, that's really misnamed. It's not the prodigal son, it's the prodigal father. 
 
But, but no parable is complete in and of itself. If that story were really complete the 
father would have gone to the far country and gotten into the pig pen with the boy. 
Again, please don't misunderstand me. 
 
I'm not suggesting Jesus didn't get it right. Never. But I'm simply saying that if we 
were talking about a parable of grace that's what it would be. 
 
It's not me getting it right and oh yes, okay, I'll turn around and dad is waiting back 
there for me and finally, when I get there he'll love me. No, it goes beyond that. It 
goes beyond that. 
 
Let's pray. Thank you Father. Thank you that when we were helpless in our sin and 
despair when we were helpless in our arrogance and our pride you came to us in our 
unrighteousness and in Jesus Christ gave us everything we needed for redemption 
and godliness. We testify you are the great I am. You are life. You are the source of 
life. You are everything in yourself and you have given it all to us for free. Don't you 
17 
 
understand lord how foolish that is? I mean, we could just take your gifts and trash 
them. But you love us that much that you're willing to take the risk of us breaking 
your heart. 
 
Thank you. Each of us in this room would say to you tonight thank you for the means 
of grace in our lives. For some of us parents, some of us Sunday school teachers, 
some of us friends, some of us a spouse, some of us a preacher. However it came 
lord, thank you for your grace. Thank you for taking us into your arms. Oh, great I am. 
In your name, amen.  
 
This is Dr. John Oswalt and his teaching on the book of Isaiah. This is session number 
22, Isaiah chapters 44 through 46. 
