1 
 
Dr. John Oswalt, Isaiah, Session 30, Isa. 63-66 
© 2024 John Oswalt and Ted Hildebrandt 
 
This is Dr. John Oswalt in his teaching on the book of Isaiah. This is session number 
30, Isaiah chapters 63 through 66.  
 
Let's pray together. Father how we thank you for your servant our brother Isaiah. 
Thank you for this man who was open to your spirit, led by your spirit, inspired by 
your spirit. Thank you that through him you were able to speak to your people not 
only in that time 2,700 years ago but now. 
 
Thank you. We pray that once again you will help us that we can understand more 
clearly what it is that you're saying in your book and then be able to apply it more 
clearly to our lives so that we indeed may be the people of God that you call us to be. 
In your name, we pray.  Amen.  
 
All right, we are looking at the chapters 60 to 62 tonight. The middle portion of that 
final section of the book, which we have said is the technical term, a chiasm. 
 
And the middle portion of the book is chapters, and the middle portion of the chiasm 
is chapters 60 to 62. We saw how the beginning and the end focus upon the goal of it 
all and that is righteous Gentiles. That's God's intention and we saw that all the way 
back in the beginning in chapter 2. What is this all about? It is about the world 
coming to know God as the final chapter says, chapter 66, to see his glory. 
 
And again, I've said it many times during our study, but the book of Isaiah is a 
symphony. The symphony is characterized by these themes which come to the 
surface and then go back and then here they are again. And one of these themes is 
seen in chapter 6. Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God of hosts. 
 
The whole earth is full of his glory. And in this last chapter, all the nations are going 
to come and see the glory of God. As again, as I've said to you many times, glory in 
the Old Testament is not something ephemeral and passing. 
 
Glory is reality. It is significant. It is solid. 
 
And so God's goal is that all people will see his reality. They'll see his reality in the 
world. They'll see his reality in the word. 
 
They'll see his reality in the lives of other people as God sheds his glory upon us. 
Then we saw how, in fact, the people themselves are unrighteous, the unrighteous 
Judeans. They fail to be what they were supposed to be for the sake of these folks. 
 
2 
 
And so, God comes as the divine warrior, the one who indeed defeats the enemy, 
and as I've argued, the enemy of sin. And the result then is what we'll find in these 
three chapters tonight. Now let me pull all of this together a bit before we jump into 
that and remind you how I think the book is structured. 
 
Now I say I think because in a big complicated work like this, there are many, many 
opinions of how this material all fits together. But I have suggested to you that 
chapters one to six are the call to servanthood. And we see there the problem. 
 
How can this Israel, this sinful, corrupt Israel, ever be the pure, holy Israel that is 
going to be the one to whom all the nations come to learn God's teaching? And the 
solution I suggested to you is when the same experience that the man of unclean lips 
had is had by the people as a whole. Then we saw how in chapters seven to thirty-
nine, trust is the basis of servanthood. Can this God, this holy one of Israel, can he be 
trusted? Or will we trust humanity, the nations of humanity instead? And we saw 
how in those chapters, God demonstrates to them that the nations are not to be 
trusted. 
 
Humanity is not to be trusted. But he is entirely trustworthy. And we saw how that 
theme of trust, or what is the common synonym for trust here in Isaiah and 
throughout the Old Testament? Mel got it. 
 
Wait. Wait on the Lord. Because in fact, we may say we trust him, but if we run 
ahead and try to solve the problem for ourselves, we clearly do not trust him. 
 
It is when we lay aside our own schemes, our own understandings, our own 
purposes, and allow God to work those out in his way, that we do truly trust him. By 
the time you come to the end of 39, it has been proven God can be trusted. In the 
crisis of the Assyrian attack upon Jerusalem, Hezekiah trusted God, and against all 
the odds, God delivered him. 
 
At the same time, we see that Hezekiah is not the Messiah. Hezekiah is fallible. This 
Messiah that was promised, especially back here in chapter 11, we are going to have 
to look for somebody other than Hezekiah. 
 
He is not the child who is born upon whose shoulders is the government. We have to 
look for somebody else. So, in chapters 40-55, we have grace, the motive, and the 
means of servanthood. 
 
And it is in 40-48 we see that motivation. They are chosen servants of God. In spite of 
the fact that they are in exile as a result of their sins. 
 
Nevertheless, God has not cast them off. They are chosen. And He is going to use 
them in His lawsuit against the gods. 
3 
 
 
He is going to use them to prove that He alone is God, and there is no other. But the 
question then that emerges, and so that is the motive. Grace, unmerited, 
undeserved, is going to motivate them to trust God. 
 
But the question remains, how? Is God simply going to ignore their sin and ours? Just 
act as if we have done nothing? And I have argued again and again that God can't do 
that. Of course, He can do anything. But if He did simply ignore our sins, the world 
which is built on cause and effect would fly apart. 
 
We have sinned, and so something has to be done about the effect of that. And the 
effect of that is that the servant gives his life for the servants. And that then is the 
means. 
 
The motive, 40 to 48. The means in 49 to 55. Well, by the time you come to the end 
of 55, they have been delivered. 
 
Nature is rejoicing. What's left? Eleven more chapters are left. And we see that 
righteousness is the expected character of the servants. 
 
And that's what we've been looking at these last days, the character of servanthood. 
Why are we delivered from our sins in order that we might share the character of 
God? And that is 56 to 66. So, that's the way I understand the book to be working. 
 
Other people understand it in different ways, and that's okay. They can be wrong. 
And I could be too. 
 
But this is how I see the book operating. I should say that the thing that is most 
commonly said about this proposal is, Wait a minute, Oswald. Servant, the word, 
doesn't appear in 1 to 39. 
 
So how in the world can you use that theme? Well, I use it because of where the 
book goes. Very clearly in 40 to 66, the servanthood of the people is at the center. 
And I would argue that given that, we can see how the previous part of the book is 
leading up to that. 
 
Okay. Questions or comments about that? I mean, if you get done with 30 weeks and 
you don't have this in your head, I'm sort of blown. Questions? Comments? Okay. 
 
Going once. All right. Chapter 60, verses 1 to 3. And I want you to compare those 
verses. 
 
Arise, shine, for your light has come. The glory of the Lord, there's glory, has risen 
upon you. Behold, darkness shall cover the earth, thick darkness the peoples. 
4 
 
 
But the Lord will arise upon you. His glory will be seen upon you. There's glory again. 
 
And nations will come to your light and kings to the brightness of your rising. Now I 
ask you to compare that to chapter 59, verses 9, 10, and 11. Therefore justice is far 
from us. 
 
Righteousness does not overtake us. We hope for light and behold darkness. For 
brightness, but we walk in gloom. 
 
We grope for the wall like the blind. We grope like those who have no eyes. We 
stumble at noon as in the twilight. 
 
Among those in full vigor, we're like dead men. We all growl like bears. We moan and 
moan like doves. 
 
We hope for justice, but there is none. For salvation, but it's far from us. Would you 
say there's a contrast between those? Now what accounts for the change? What 
comes in between those two? The Redeemer. 
 
The Divine Warrior. That whole section, 59, 15b to 21, is what comes in between and 
explains how you get from 59, 9, 10, and 11 to 61, 1 to 3. How is it possible for us to 
be the lantern through which the light of God shines on the world? Only one way, if 
the Divine Warrior comes and defeats the sin and unrighteousness that has indeed 
held them and us captive. Now again, there are many commentators who will not 
accept that. 
 
They will not accept that there is an intentional connection between the failure of 59 
and the previous and what we have in chapter 60. They'll just say, well, it's 
accidental. That's one thing, this is another thing. 
 
I do not buy that for a minute. 59, 15b to 21 is in there on purpose. He came, he saw 
that there was no man, there was no one who could do this, who could translate his 
people from unrighteousness to righteousness. 
 
He wondered why there was no one to intercede. So, his own arm brought him 
salvation and his righteousness upheld him. He put on righteousness as a 
breastplate. 
 
Yes? Yeah, go ahead. What do they do with those verses? There's no intended 
connection. You've got 59 that says one thing, you've got 59b, 15b to 21 that says 
another thing, and you've got 61 and following that says another thing, and they're 
unrelated. 
 
5 
 
It's just a collection of speeches that various people made at various times. That's 
why I say to students, if you can do something else than academic Bible study, do it. 
If you can't, then for God's sake, don't do something else. 
 
The church needs you. But academic biblical study today is a minefield, largely 
dominated by people who began as believers and lost their faith at the university and 
don't have anything else to do with their lives. So, it's serious business. 
 
Okay, now, where does the light and the glory come from? Does it come from within 
them? No, it does not, does it? The glory of the Lord has risen upon you. The Lord 
will arise upon you and his glory will be seen in you. Yes, it's not saying that they 
were unrighteous and they really, really worked and really, really did what they were 
supposed to do and they became righteous. 
 
It's not saying that for a minute. It's saying this light that now shines out of them is a 
gift. A gift which has been received. 
 
Now, what is the light for? Verse 3, the nations will come to your light and kings to 
the brightness of your rising. What's the danger in seeking God's fullness for 
ourselves? We're quick to think it came from us. Yeah, what else? It doesn't go any 
further. 
 
It's about me and my relationship to God and what God is doing for me. Back to 
original sin with pride. Yes, yes. 
 
The devil really doesn't care how he gets us to focus on ourselves. The world's way is 
fine, but so is the self-righteousness way. Okay. 
 
Now, verses 4 to 14. What is it that the nations will bring to Jerusalem? There are 
two or three things they're going to bring. What is one? Riches. 
 
Yeah, your sons and daughters. Those are the two primary things. They're going to 
come with their wealth. 
 
And they're going to bring your sons and daughters. And if you remember all the way 
through, particularly from chapter 40 on, the question is, doesn't the exile mean 
we're done? We're wiped out as a people. We're absorbed into these great empires 
and it's over. 
 
That's why they thought the exile couldn't happen. Because if it did happen, we're 
gone. But he says, no. 
 
6 
 
The nations, the nations that once oppressed you are going to come and they're 
going to bring your children. Mary Jo, you're trying to ask something. I would like to 
just go back to verse 3 there a minute. 
 
When you're saying that us seeking God, it's not like we're just seeking him in some 
random way because he has a mission for our life. And the thing is when we're 
searching for him, it may not be what we want. So that's sort of a – I'll just use the 
word tricky. 
 
But you may not really know what it is you're asking for. I think that's very likely. And 
again, I think that's – you heard my message yesterday. 
 
God is willing to start with us with very, very inadequate understanding of what his 
ultimate program is. But as long as we stay with him, as long as we're responsive to 
his Holy Spirit, he's going to open up what that program is. And that's not all at once. 
 
No, that's typically not. It's typically – You have consistently said, wait. Yeah, we're 
fairly slow learners. 
 
It would be nice if he would just tell us all at once. But probably it wouldn't be nice if 
he would tell us all at once. We'd get scared and run away. 
 
Or we just wouldn't get it. Yeah, we wouldn't get it. Yes. Yes. So yes. Yes. 
 
Good. Yes. Now why do they bring these things? Verse 9. To honor the Lord. 
 
The coastlands will do what? Wait for me. Back in chapter 41 that was said. The ends 
of the earth wait for me. 
 
They don't know it. They think they're doing just fine. But in fact, he being the only 
God, whether they know it or not, they're waiting for him. 
 
So, they're doing it in response to the revelation of his character and of his nature. 
But look at the very last clause. Why are they doing this? Last clause of verse 9. Yes. 
 
He has made you beautiful. He has glorified you. Now the question is, how does he 
do that? And we'll talk more about this. 
 
But there's that theme. They see something in redeemed Israel that attracts them. 
And let's skip to question 3 there. 
 
What is that wealth going to be used for? Look at verse 13 especially. Adorn the 
sanctuary. Yes. 
 
7 
 
They want to come and join in glorifying God. They want to come and express 
something of the wonder of who God is that they see in the lamp. And the light that 
is shining from the lamp. 
 
They want to be part of that. Back in chapter 2. I keep drawing you back there 
because I think it is so programmatic. They want to come to the mountain of the 
house of the Lord to learn his ways. 
 
Those two go together. They want to come to the place of worship. They want to 
come to the sanctuary. 
 
But they want to come there because they believe that in the sanctuary they can 
learn the ways of God. That they so desperately need. Now let's look at number 2. 
These are the last two occurrences of the phrase, the Holy One of Israel. 
 
In verse 9 and in verse 14. Now I've said it before. We've talked about it before. 
 
What two things does this phrase, the Holy One of Israel, connote? There are two 
ideas in here that are intertwined. What are they? Separation. But more than 
separation. 
 
Relationship. So there is the one side. It is a relationship. 
 
It's the Holy One of Israel. The other side. He is utterly transcendent. 
 
He is not this world. He is not any part of this world. But that not only relates to a 
separate essence. 
 
He is a separate kind of being from the creation. How else is he separate? Good, 
good. Character. 
 
Again, I think I've said this before. The most influential book on holiness written in 
the 20th century was The Idea of the Holy by a German scholar named Rudolf Otto. 
And in that book, he basically defined holiness as this kind of separation. 
 
He used Latin terms. You always use Latin when you want to impress people. He 
spoke about the mysterium tremendum. 
 
I don't know why he couldn't say the tremendous mystery. But that which produces 
awe. When we're in the presence of it, we're terrified. 
 
He used another word, the numinous. But there's one thing he did not talk about. 
Because you see, it's only in the Bible that there is a distinctly holy character. 
 
8 
 
You cannot separate his transcendent essence from his transcendent character. And 
the amazing thing is, he wants to share that character. When he says, you must be 
holy as I am holy, he doesn't mean we have to become God. 
 
But he does mean, I want you to share my character. And that phrase, the holy one 
of Israel, occurs 25 times in the book. And then there's also the holy one of Jacob, 
which occurs once and only here. 
 
The only place in the whole Bible. So, for my money, it's 26 times. Whatever that 
means. 
 
Out of the 31 occurrences in the whole Bible, 26 of them are here in Isaiah. Now let's 
look at a few of these and try to understand what's going on. First of all, before we 
do that, look at how they're used here in verse 9. The coastlands will wait for me, the 
ships of Tarshish first, to bring your children from afar, their silver and gold with 
them, for the name of the Lord your God and for the holy one of Israel, because he 
has made you beautiful. 
 
Now, verse 14. The sons of those who afflicted you will come bending low to you and 
all who despised you will bow down at your feet. They will call you the city of the 
Lord, the city of Yahweh, the Zion of the holy one of Israel. 
 
In other words, they're going to recognize that you are a distinct people because of 
this distinct relationship. Now, let's go back. Chapter 1, verse 4. See where we've 
come from. 
 
Somebody read it, please. Chapter 1, verse 4. Alas, sinful nation, a people laden with 
iniquity, a group of evildoers, children who are corruptors. They have forsaken the 
Lord, they have provoked anger, the holy one of Israel. 
 
They have turned away backward. They have provoked the anger of the holy one of 
Israel. The version I have says they have despised the holy one of Israel. 
 
Wow. That's where we started. That's where we started. 
 
It's picked up again in chapter 5. We won't take the time to look at that, but the 
same thing. You have treated the holy one of Israel with contempt. Now then, to 
chapter 30, verse 11. 
 
And you really have to start with verse 10. They say to the seers, don't see. To the 
prophets, don't prophesy to us what is right. 
 
Speak to us smooth things. Prophesy illusions. Leave the way, turn aside from the 
path. 
9 
 
 
Let us hear no more about the holy one of Israel. Now I love verse 12. Therefore, 
thus says the holy one of Israel. 
 
You want me to shut up? Well, let me tell you something. Contempt, provoking him 
to anger. Trying to get him to shut up. 
 
Verse 15 of chapter 30. What is the holy one of Israel's word to us? In repentance 
and rest you'll be saved. In quietness and trust will be your strength. 
 
Grace. Would you just stop rushing around, trying to get your illusions to come true, 
and rest? Rest in me? That's the holy one who's saying that. Chapter 37, verse 23. 
 
This is addressed to Sennacherib. Somebody read that one. Reproached and 
blasphemed. 
 
Against whom have you raised your voice and lifted up your eyes on high? Against 
the holy one of Israel. Yes, yes. My friend, you don't know whom you have chosen to 
take on here. 
 
You think that you have mocked Hezekiah. You think that you have mocked the local 
god of Judah. Oh, he's the god of Judah, all right. 
 
But he's the holy one. You have gotten yourself into a lot bigger mess than you 
bargained for. Chapter 41, verse 14. 
 
Fear not, you worm, Jacob. You men of Israel. I am the one who helps you, declares 
Yahweh. 
 
Your redeemer is the holy one of Israel. So we've moved through from where the 
people are mocking the Lord to where the people are trying to get the holy one to 
shut up to Assyria mocking the Holy One and getting himself in a lot of hot water for 
it to the Holy One of Israel proclaiming himself in grace as their redeemer. And in this 
whole last section of the book the holy one, your redeemer, occurs over and over 
and over again. 
 
Because he's the holy one, he's able to redeem you. Because he's given himself to 
you in love, he wants to redeem you. And he's going to redeem you. 
 
And the nations will come to glorify the sanctuary of the holy one of Israel. Okay, 
moving on. Verses 15 to 22. 
 
What will be the evidence that the people are truly redeemed? Verses 15 and 16. 
Yes. When the oppressors will come. 
10 
 
 
And then what will happen in the end of verse 16? Yes, yes. You'll recognize, finally, 
when these things occur you'll know I am the Lord. Our time is flying away here. 
 
26.1 talks about you have a strong city whose walls are salvation. And 60.18 says you 
will call your walls salvation and your gate praise. What's the point of imagery like 
that? What's he saying? All right, they're closed in with him. 
 
Good, good. What else? Walls are sort of like the helmet of salvation. All right, the 
helmet of salvation. 
 
Salvation becomes your protection. And its gates praise. What's the point of that 
imagery? All right, the entry to praise. 
 
Pardon? All right, it faces out. Those who come through the gates come through with 
praise. Lift up your heads, you mighty gates, that the king of glory may come in. 
 
Yes, yes. So, there's a sense in which salvation is, if you will, static in the sense that it 
provides our protection, it encloses us, but praise is the entrance and exit of our lives 
in relation to him. That kind of imagery is worth your thinking about when you're 
reading the Bible devotionally. 
 
It's easy for us to just sort of, our eyes sort of skitter across the surface and we don't 
really think, now what's that about? Your walls are salvation. Yep, okay, what's the 
next verse say? So, it's worth your time, in poetry especially, to try to think, what is 
this imagery, what's the author seeking to convey by using that kind of imagery? 
Now, verse 21. Your people shall all be righteous. 
 
Go back to 58 verses 6 through 8. And I want to ask the question, is this, when it 
says, your people will all be righteous, I want to ask you, is that a real condition, or is 
it just a declaration of a position? Okay, you're right, Candice, we're talking about 
behavior there in 58, aren't we? We're talking about lifestyle, yes, yes. Exactly, and 
so, again, there are many people who will say in regard to this whole passage, no, no, 
this is the righteousness that is by faith. God declares that we are righteous, even 
though we're not. 
 
I don't think so. Now, to be sure, to be sure, in justification, we are given the 
righteousness of Christ. We are put in the place of Christ. 
 
That is a theological truth. But, I want to insist, we cannot stop there. He gives us 
that position in order that we might manifest that character. 
 
11 
 
He gives it to us, then what are we going to do with it? Exactly, yes, yes. So, in 
Philippians, Paul says, I want the righteousness that comes by faith. And many 
people will say, that's a position. 
 
God looks at you through Jesus' colored glasses, he sees you as righteous, even 
though we all know you're not righteous, but it's righteousness by faith, not by 
works. Well, that misses the point. Can I be good enough for God in my strength? 
Absolutely not. 
 
How can you and I live the life of God in our relationships, in our behavior, in our 
lifestyle? Only one way, by faith. Do you see my point? Character change is by faith. 
It's not a question of character change, oh that's works, and position, that's faith. 
 
No, it's both. We come into a new position, no longer enemies, but sons and 
daughters, by faith. Thank God. 
 
And by faith, we are enabled to live God's life. All right. Your people shall all be 
righteous. 
 
The branch of my planting. Now, I want you to keep your eye on that phrase. The 
branch of my planting. 
 
Way back in chapter one, the people were compared to a dried-up forest that is 
tender for the fire that's going to sweep through. This language of trees runs through 
the book. Trees can be arrogant, they can be upstanding, they can be proud, or they 
can be a blessed gift from God. 
 
Okay, keep your eye on that. Now then, chapter 61, one to three. And I ask you to 
look at chapter 11, verses one to three, and the key thing I was hoping you would see 
there is the same emphasis on the Spirit. 
 
Chapter 11, in its discussion of the Messiah, speaks about how the Spirit is going to 
live His life through the Messiah. And so here it is again. The Spirit of the Lord God is 
upon me. 
 
Why? Because the Lord has anointed me. Now I'm perfectly confident, and I could be 
perfectly wrong, but I'm perfectly confident this is what's going on in Jesus' baptism. 
Again, I hope there are instant replays on these things. 
 
I want to see John's face, you know? He's baptizing these people in the name of God, 
in the name of God, in the name of God, in the... Jesus, what are you doing here? You 
ought to be baptizing me! And Jesus says, let us fulfill all righteousness. John, let's do 
the right thing here. What's the right thing? To demonstrate as the Spirit of God 
comes down on this man, He really is the Messiah. 
12 
 
 
Why is the Spirit upon me? Because the Lord has anointed me. So, no, Jesus didn't 
need to receive the Holy Spirit. One of the heresies of the Church is that Jesus 
became the Son of God when He got anointed by the Spirit, to which I say reverently, 
hogwash. 
 
He was the second person of the Trinity from the beginning of the beginnings. He 
didn't become anything here, but this was a symbolic action that confirmed this one 
really was the Messiah. He is, in fact, fulfilling Isaiah 61. 
 
Now, what is the anointed one going to do? Can we list it here? All right, he's going 
to preach. He's going to bring good news to whom? The poor. Blessed are the poor, 
Luke says. 
 
And I don't think that Matthew is wrong when he says, to the poor in spirit. 
Sometimes we who are rich use that as a kind of an excuse, but typically it is the poor 
who are contrite. That's what we're talking about here. 
 
We've seen that note running all the way through the book. Those people who can 
stand in themselves and in their own righteousness, they have nothing to hear from 
God. Again, Jesus confirmed that. 
 
You don't send the doctor to somebody who's well. You send the doctor to 
somebody who knows they need help. All right, what else is he going to do? He's 
going to heal the brokenhearted. 
 
What else? Freedom for the captives. What else? Release the prisoners. Pardon the 
prisoners? He will announce the year of the Lord's favor and the day of vengeance 
for our God. 
 
And I hope by this time I don't need to talk to you about vengeance in this context. 
This is good news and not bad news. And to comfort those who mourn. 
 
Now again, I think if you know this passage and you hear the Beatitudes, you know 
what this guy is claiming. Blessed are those who mourn for they shall be comforted. 
Yeah. 
 
And all those people standing there on that hillside are saying, wait a minute. Who is 
this? But wait a minute. I'm from Nazareth. 
 
I knew him when he was a runny-nosed kid running up and down the streets. What's 
he saying? The oil of gladness instead of mourning. The garment of praise instead of 
a faint spirit. 
 
13 
 
Now here's where I'm coming to. The latter statement in verse 3. Why is he going to 
do all this? Give them a new name. The planting of the Lord. 
 
That they may be called oaks of righteousness. The planting of the Lord. Remember 
that? The branch he has planted. 
 
The planting of the Lord that he may be glorified. Yeah. He's going to turn us into 
trees. 
 
He's going to start his own plantation. Not the southern plantation where we're all 
slaves, but a tree plantation. Rooted, fruitful, productive. 
 
A blessing. That's his goal. Those who are contrite. 
 
Those who are broken-hearted over their sin. Those who are captive to their sin. 
Those who mourn. 
 
Lord, God has anointed me. Yes. Beauty for ashes, I think. 
 
Yes. Beauty for ashes. And again, you remember back at the end of chapter 3, where 
the beautiful women of Zion, with every kind of accoutrement that you can imagine, 
walked along with ankle bracelets that were linked together, of course, so they 
couldn't stride like they're walking through a plowed field, but they have to take little 
mincing steps. 
 
And God says, yeah, in place of that beautiful embroidered sash, there's going to be a 
rope. In place of that beautiful coiffure, there's going to be baldness. Which I take 
personally, but anyway. 
 
But here, we've turned it on its head. Beauty for ashes. The ashes of our 
unrighteousness. 
 
The ashes of our brokenness. The ashes of our failure. His beauty. 
 
The question is, is the broken-hearted for sin or for grief and sorrow? And my answer 
is yes. I think it's inclusive. All of the things that break our hearts. 
 
And to a significant degree, broken-heartedness is in the world because of sin. So, all 
of the grieving that comes to us as humans, Christ has come to deal with. And I'm 
confident that's why you do have that interesting language in Isaiah 53. 
 
He has taken our pains and our illnesses, is what it literally says. Now I don't think 
that King James is wrong when it translates it, our griefs and our sorrows. I think 
those who would totally limit it to sickness and pain are wrong. 
14 
 
 
But if we were only to say it's that spiritual kind of stuff, I think that's wrong too. In 
the cross, he has taken all the pain, the grief, the illness, the sorrow of this world, 
and has taken it into himself. And I always, I can never get away from this in 
meditating on Good Friday. 
 
Think of it. In those three or four hours, all the pain, all the grief, all the horror, all 
the tragedy of this world came upon him. It's no wonder that he sweat drops of 
blood in Gethsemane and asked God if there was another way. 
 
Many people have gone to martyrdom singing. So, what's the matter with this Jesus 
fella? A wimp? Oh no. Oh no. 
 
Because of what was going to come to him. And he was able to proclaim freedom as 
a result. All right, our time is gone. 
 
And we've got a ways to go here yet. Let me just quickly point out some things. Now 
we're starting down the other side of the hill. 
 
We've come to the apex here in 61.1-3. And in a real way, what's the goal of the 
whole thing? That they may be called oaks of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, 
that he may be glorified. In a real sense, that's the apex of it all right there. Now we 
start down the other side. 
 
They shall build up the ancient ruins. They shall raise up the former devastations. 
They shall repair the ruined cities, the devastations of many generations. 
 
Strangers will stand and tend your flocks. Foreigners will be your plowmen and your 
vinedressers. These people that oppressed you are going to be your slaves. 
 
They're going to do your menial work for you. Why? Verse 6, so that you can be 
called the priests of God. They will speak of you as the ministers of our God. 
 
You will eat the wealth of the nations. In their glory, you will boast. Ah, remember 
what God said back in Exodus 19? In that chapter that's preparing them for the 
covenant? If you accept my covenant, you will be a kingdom of priests, a royal 
priesthood, a holy nation. 
 
They thought that to have the kingdom of God was to have a Davidic monarch on the 
throne, that they would be an independent nation-state whose independence was 
guaranteed by a standing army, and that would be what it meant to be the kingdom 
of God. They came back from exile and none of that is possible. There's no Davidic 
monarch. 
 
15 
 
They are not rich. They are not the center of the world. They have no army. 
 
They have no independent state. So, it's over. Now, folks, you have a chance to 
become what you were meant to be, the priests of the world, for God's sake. 
 
And in a real sense, that was when they began to recover their sense of identity, 
when they said, ah, we can become a nation of priests. Now, I don't think they still 
understood that that priesthood was really for others. They saw it as simply, okay, 
we're going to serve God. 
 
But what's a priest? A priest is a mediator who stands between God and the world. 
So if the oppressors, the former oppressors, become your menial servants, it 
becomes the opportunity for you to finally become what you were called to be in the 
outset. All right, push on a bit farther. 
 
I'll rejoice in the Lord, and my soul will exult in my God. This is verse 10. For he has 
clothed me with the garments of salvation. 
 
He has covered me with the robe of righteousness. As a bridegroom decks himself 
like a priest with a beautiful headdress, as a bride adorns herself with her jewels, for 
as the earth brings forth its sprouts, as a garden causes what is sown in it to sprout 
up, so the Lord God will cause righteousness and praise to sprout up before all the 
nations. Now, if you have the RSV or the NRSV, or even the NIV in some cases, in a lot 
of these places where the word righteousness appears, you'll find vindication, 
particularly here in verse 11. 
 
He will cause vindication and praise to sprout up before all the nations. No, not so 
the NLT. The NLT got it right. 
 
Do you see the difference between vindication and righteousness? Now, what 
they're doing is they're saying, well, that's God's righteousness displayed in you. That 
is your vindication. Again, there's a theological reading there. 
 
The text says he will make righteousness. It doesn't say God's righteousness. 
Righteousness will spring up before the nations. 
 
For Zion's sake, I'll not keep silent. For Jerusalem's sake, I'll not be quiet until her 
righteousness goes forth as brightness and her salvation as a burning torch. Now, 
notice, and I am going to let you go before midnight. 
 
Notice that pairing. Not P-A-R-I-N-G, but P-A-I-R-I-N-G. Remember what I've said 
about Hebrew poetry, that the same point is made twice, but using synonyms. 
 
16 
 
So, righteousness is paired with salvation. Now, each one of them offers something 
to the other. They're not just plain synonyms. 
 
So, what is it to be saved? It is to be enabled to display the righteousness of God in 
your life. But, by the same token, the only way you can ever display the 
righteousness of God in your life is as a result of God's divine salvation. I'm a good 
man. 
 
I'm righteous. The way God calls people to be righteous. And if you people would 
work a little harder, you could be as good as I am. 
 
Never, never, never. Oh well, I'm saved. So, it doesn't matter how I live. 
 
No, each one informs the other. To be saved is to live the righteousness of God. But 
you cannot possibly live the righteousness of God without gracious salvation. 
 
They're interlinked. God works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure. Yes, 
yes. 
 
Work out your own salvation with trembling. Because God is doing it. Wonderful, 
wonderful mix there. 
 
Okay, let me just point out a couple of more things and we'll stop. In these remaining 
verses, here it is again. The nations will see your righteousness. 
 
All the kings your glory. Here righteousness and glory are paired. You'll be called by a 
new name that the mouth of the Lord will give. 
 
You will be a crown of beauty. Again, here's another one of those themes. You go all 
the way back to chapter 28. 
 
And Samaria is the crown on the head of the drunks at the head of the verdant 
valley. You'll be a crown of beauty in the hand of the Lord. No more forsaken. 
 
There's another term that has appeared before. You'll be called Hepzibah. We don't 
name our daughters that anymore. 
 
But that literally means my delight is in her. It's a beautiful name. Yeah, or Hepsi. 
 
When we were trying to decide if we would use a nickname for our daughter 
Elizabeth, Karen proposed Betsy. And I said, no, we had a cow named Betsy. That 
won't work. 
 
17 
 
So, he speaks about her as his bride. And finally, verse 10, go through, go through the 
gates. Prepare the way for the people. 
 
Build up, build up the highway. Use a concordance and look up the highway in the 
book of Isaiah. And you'll find it very interesting. 
 
Lift up a signal. Some versions, and I really kind of like it better say a banner. A signal 
flag. 
 
Look that one up. Say to the daughter of Zion, behold, your salvation comes. Behold, 
his reward is with him. 
 
His recompense before him. And they shall be called the holy people. The redeemed 
of the Lord. 
 
You shall be called sought out. A city not forsaken. Yes. 
 
God enables his people to be righteous. The divine warrior whose blood stains his 
garments. He is the one who is anointed of the Lord to preach good news. 
 
That one. And the result is you'll be the bride of God in whom he takes pride. And all 
the nations will come to your God because of you. Amen.  
 
Let me pray. Father, thank you for these days together around your word. Thank you 
for these dear friends. And I pray, oh God, that some of the things that we have 
talked about will find lodging in their hearts. That you will indeed convince them how 
precious they are to you. 
 
And you will indeed display your beauty in their lives. In ways that will draw men and 
women to you. Thank you, Jesus. In your name, amen.  
 
God bless you all. This is Dr. John Oswalt in his teaching on the book of Isaiah. 
 
This is session number 30, Isaiah chapters 63 through 66. 
